[gong and cymbal music]
♪ ♪
[haunting orchestral music]
all: ♪ Oh, oh, oh ♪
♪ ♪
♪ Oh, oh, oh ♪
♪ Ohh ♪
♪ ♪
[dramatic horn music]
♪ Oh, oh, oh ♪
♪ ♪
♪ Oh, oh ♪
[gong crashes]
[solemn orchestral music]
♪ ♪
♪ Oh, oh, oh, oh ♪
[majestic horn music]
♪ ♪
>> My children,
you are the modern descendants
Of King Cadmus,
who founded our city.
Why do you come here
with these laurel branches,
ritually dressed,
and all the signs of desperate
people begging for help?
In the city,
I hear prayers for the sick
and the sound of weeping.
The air is heavy with incense
and tears.
What more do you want?
I can't rely
on secondhand reports.
I have come
to find out for myself.
I am Oedipus the king.
Everyone knows my name.
You, sir, you are a priest,
a man old enough to be wise
and entitled to speak first.
A sudden panic, is it,
or a demand for action?
Anything I can do,
I will do, of course.
I would have to be a man
without pity to close my eyes
and stop my ears to a petition
from everyone such as this.
>> King Oedipus, lord of Thebes,
you see us, many hundreds,
crowding to your palace:
youngsters like birds
still in the nest,
old men whose eyes
have seen everything,
priests of Zeus like me
and of other gods,
and the very best
of our young men.
We have all come here.
There are thousands more
sitting in the marketplace
carrying emblems like these,
others at the two altars
of Pallas Athene
and at Ismenos' shrine
by the riverbank
where the future can be read
in the ashes.
And we are all offering
desperate prayers.
You've seen yourself
what's happening here.
This city is like a warship
defeated in battle,
wallowing aimlessly
in a sea of blood.
The crops are rotting
in the fields.
Disease is killing
all the cattle.
Babies are born dead
or decay in the womb,
and as if that wasn't enough,
some god has sent a plague
like a fire demon
to scorch our people.
The courtyards Cadmus built
will soon be empty.
The underworld is already
crowded with Thebans
weeping in the darkness
for themselves and their kin.
If we choose to come here
to beg for help,
it's not because we think of you
as a god
but because we know you
to be the best of men
not only in the daily business
of the state
but in those
deeper mysteries of life
where the mind of man
touches eternity.
We haven't forgotten
that it was you,
a young man newly arrived here,
who solved
the riddle of the Sphinx,
that monstrous perversion
of woman, lion, and bird,
and freed us
from her magical tyranny.
We could do nothing
to help you then,
and I think--we all think--
some god helped you.
That's why,
world-famous Oedipus,
we're asking for your help
again.
Find us some remedy.
Either from your own experience
or by calling on
supernatural powers,
you've solved terrible problems
in the past,
and that gives us confidence
in your abilities now.
Indeed, you have a reputation
to live up to.
Your genius has saved us once.
It would be ridiculous to have
preserved us then
only to see us wasted now.
Save us again
as you did before.
Sail under that same
lucky star
and guide us,
as a real prince should,
into the harbor
of good fortune and peace.
An unmanned ship
needs no captain.
A city that is empty
because its people are dead
has no further use
for a king.
>> My children,
believe me when I say
I know everything
you are suffering,
why you've come here,
and what you ask of me.
I suffer as much,
perhaps more, than you do.
You carry your
personal burdens of sorrow.
I carry them too
and my own
and the city's.
I have not been sleeping.
My eyes, like yours,
are bloodshot
with too frequent tears.
I've walked every corridor
in the palace
and all the secret galleries
of my mind,
searching and searching
what best to do,
and this much I have done--
because I haven't been idle--
the one thing that seems
sensible.
My brother-in-law Creon,
the son of Menoeceus,
I have sent to
the oracle of Apollo at Delphi
to ask the Pythia,
the sacred priestess,
what action or word of mine
might help.
He ought to be here.
His mission has taken
far longer than it should,
and I begin to wonder
what keeps him so long.
When he arrives,
whatever the oracle demands,
you have my word,
will be meticulously performed.
>> No man can say
better than that
nor on a better cue.
Look.
There's the signal.
Creon himself
is approaching.
>> Whatever the message,
he's certainly smiling.
Apollo, god of healing,
let the news be good.
>> It must be good.
He moves like a man
confident of his success.
>> He can hear us now.
Dear brother-in-law,
son of Menoeceus.
What is the god's message?
What does the oracle say?
>> It's good news...
[gasps of relief]
Or perhaps I should say,
it will be good news
if all turns out well,
though, perhaps painful
to begin with.
>> And what does that mean?
At such an answer, I don't know
if I should laugh or cry.
>> Do you want me
to say it all here in public,
or shall we go in?
>> In public, of course.
While these people suffer,
I suffer too.
Their life concerns me
more than my own.
>> The answer is straightforward
and the command simple.
This is something unclean
in our city,
born here, living here.
It pollutes everything.
We harbor it.
We must drive it out.
[crowd murmurs]
>> Well, how can it be purified,
the pollution
of this unclean thing?
What is it?
>> By banishment
or by blood for blood.
It was bloodshed,
the oracle said,
that whipped up this storm
that's destroying us.
>> Whose blood was shed?
What sort of man?
>> There was a king here,
sir, before you came.
His name was Laius.
>> I know the name.
I never saw the man.
>> The man was killed,
and the oracle's meaning
is clear enough.
The murderers of Laius
must be found
and the unknown killers
brought to justice.
>> But where are they?
The trail's gone cold.
It's an old story now.
Where should we begin?
>> Here.
The god said here.
Search, and you won't
be disappointed.
No evidence is ever found
if you don't look for it.
>> Where did it happen,
this unexplained murder?
Mm, was it here in the palace
or in the country
or while he was traveling
abroad?
>> He left the city
to make a pilgrimage,
and he never returned
except in a coffin.
>> And who was with him?
Didn't anyone see it?
There must be evidence,
some scrap, some rumor.
>> One of the servants escaped.
He ran so fast he could
only remember one thing.
>> What thing?
Tell me.
The smallest clue
might lead to others.
>> He said that robbers--
not one man,
a whole band of them--
met them on the road,
and they murdered the king.
>> Robbers?
Would they dare attack a king?
Perhaps they were bored.
Theban money and political
ambition the motive.
>> Well, we thought that too
at first,
but the crisis blew up
almost at once.
We had other problems.
Laius was dead,
and no one pursued it.
>> What crisis could be greater
than a murdered king?
So there never was
a full investigation?
>> The voice of the Sphinx
seemed to mesmerize us.
She drained all our energies
with her riddling.
It was a question of survival.
No time for unsolved mysteries,
even regicide.
>> Then I shall begin it.
There's time enough now.
We'll shine a fresh light
into every corner
of the whole
dark and musty business.
Thanks to the lord Apollo,
and our gratitude to you, Creon,
for reminding us
what we had forgotten:
our duty to the dead.
I am determined to do everything
I can to help our city
and to show the gods justice.
It's in my interests, too,
to avenge this crime,
not only for Laius' sake
but for my own protection.
This unknown killer
might strike at me.
Justice for Laius and my own
safety go hand in hand.
So go to your homes.
Dear people, my children,
pick up your
sad sprays of laurel.
Call the Theban councilors here
and tell them that I shall do
everything a man can do.
With the gods' help,
we shall find out the truth
and save our city.
We must
or be destroyed.
[solemn orchestral music]
♪ ♪
>> Go home now,
good people.
The king has promised
everything we came to ask for.
Apollo, the healer, whose
priestess gave us good answers,
may come himself to cure
this sickness of man and beast.
Let us pray for that.
♪ ♪
[together]
With a voice sweet as music
from the house of gold,
the priestess speaks
to sunlit Thebes,
and the god speaks through her.
But his meaning's obscure.
My hands are shaking.
My heart is cold.
On the rack with fear.
From your island of Delos,
supreme physician,
send us your antidote
to ease these plagues.
>> Is this torture unique?
>> Or the old condition
of suffering man
through the centuries?
>> The golden child of hope
never dies.
>> And we live
by her prophecies.
[together] Heavenly Athene,
wise daughter of Zeus,
we sing first to you.
>> And your chaste sister
Artemis,
the deer slayer queen...
>> Whose stony eyes watch
in the marketplace
from her marble throne.
>> And bowman Apollo,
infallible marksman.
>> Trinity of deities,
show us your power.
>> Purge our diseases,
and save our nation.
>> If ever you saved us
in the days of disaster...
>> When the plague
enforced its reign of terror...
>> And a fire consumed us
that no man could master.
[hopeful orchestral music]
♪ ♪
>> Our agonies
are beyond telling.
>> Our whole city...
>> Slowly dying...
>> From an enemy
no man can fight.
>> Slime and fungus
on orchard and meadow.
>> Death in the womb.
>> And birth
in the shadow of death.
>> And in the mother's sight...
>> Men die without number
like birds flying...
>> Like fire consuming...
>> Despairing, crying...
>> As they pass
to the shadows of night.
♪ ♪
>> The smell of the dead.
>> The streets stinking...
>> Breeds death
and more death...
>> Beyond all counting.
>> No tears
as our children die...
>> From the girl-wife
and the gray-haired mother...
>> Tearing their nails
at the crowded altar...
>> Accusing the implacable sky.
[together]
Healer Apollo,
Athene, all-knowing,
can you not hear
a whole city screaming?
Will you not answer
our cry?
Now let the bloodstained
god of war
whose savage music I hear,
though no swords clash
or shield's ring,
be driven from our city...
>> Where the only song
is the groan of the dying...
>> The whimper of fear.
>> Route him, the manslayer.
>> Let him fly in disorder.
>> Let him hide his head
in some bleak Thracian bay...
>> Or ease himself
in Amphitrite's bed.
>> Now, whoever survives
the night
dies at first light.
[together]
Great father, Zeus,
you who punish with fire,
incinerate the god of war.
>> Before we all lie dead.
[together] Stand by us now,
wolfish god-king,
pull taut
your golden bowstring,
and let fire your shaft
that never misses.
>> And hard-riding Artemis,
whose torches flare
on the Lycian slopes...
>> Trailing sparks
as you pass.
>> And god of ecstasy,
Bacchus above all,
whose drowsy peace inspires
and protects our city.
>> God of the golden turban
and flushed face.
>> By your resinous torchlight
we stamp and cry...
>> As your maenads sweep by
from the frenzied east.
>> Fly to us
wielding ecstatic fire.
[together]
To burn this killing god
who the gods themselves despise.
[intense orchestral music]
♪ ♪
>> You have prayed to the gods.
Now listen to me.
If you act
as I tell you to act,
follow my instructions
in every detail,
those prayers will soon
be answered.
I speak as an outsider.
I know nothing of the story,
the murder, or the murderer.
So without your help
and hardly a clue to go on,
alone,
what trail can I follow?
When the crime was committed,
I wasn't even
a citizen of Thebes.
So first, I'll make
a public proclamation.
If any man here
knows the killer's name,
he must speak out now
in public to me.
Perhaps one of you
is the guilty man.
If that man is here
and gives himself up now,
it will be easier for him.
There will be no capital charge.
The severest sentence
I shall pronounce will be exile;
no greater punishment than that.
Or maybe one of you
has inside knowledge
that some foreigner
was the killer?
If you turn informer,
you will be well paid.
I shall see to that.
But my gratitude will be the
truest, most satisfying reward.
If, however, that man is here
and refuses to speak
or if anyone out of fear
for himself, his friends,
or his family
ignores these offers
and then is discovered to be
sheltering someone or himself,
on that man,
I pass sentence already.
It doesn't matter
who he is.
I, Oedipus,
forbid any man
to speak with or give shelter
to that man
in this city
or in the country under my rule.
No one may pray with him,
make sacrifices with him,
or even allow him
to wash in his house.
Everyone will throw him
out of doors
as the perpetrator
of this horrible crime
that brings such suffering
on our city.
According to
the prophetic word of Apollo
as revealed to me
by the Delphic oracle,
I stand here
as the champion of the gods
and of the dead king too.
The man himself,
the murderer,
with all solemnity,
I curse him,
whether he acted alone
or with others,
to bear the mark of this crime
for the rest of his life,
without friends, homeless,
and in misery.
I'll go further.
I don't even exclude myself.
If knowingly,
I should shelter this criminal
in any house or hearth
or any place of mine,
that the curse I have uttered
fall on me too
as fiercely as on anyone.
That is my sentence.
And it's up to you
to see it fully carried out
for the gods' sake,
for my sake,
and the sake of our
plague-ridden,
god-deserted city.
To be honest with you,
I'm surprised that no
purification ceremonies
or investigations
were undertaken
when so excellent
a king as Laius
was inexplicably murdered.
Even without the gods' command,
that should have been looked
into, I should have thought.
Now, however, I am king.
I enjoy Laius' title, his bed,
and his wife.
She is a kind of common ground
between us,
and his children, indeed,
if he had had any,
would be another bond,
sharing a mother with mine.
And he was the sad victim
of this tragedy.
These links between us
and my feeling for the man
make me determined
to fight for him now
as if he were my own father.
Nothing will be too much trouble
to ferret him out,
this destroyer of Laius,
the heir to Labdacus,
and all the ancient
kings of Thebes
back to Cadmus himself
and Agenor, his father.
And if any man dares
to disobey these orders,
let the gods' curses
fall on him too--
barren earth, barren cattle,
a barren wife,
and all the horrors this
suffering city daily endures--
without mercy
till the end of his life.
For the honest people of Thebes
who follow me
in intention and action,
justice be ours
and the gods' help today
and every day.
>> That curse will frighten
any man, great king of Thebes,
and it terrifies me.
>> I am not the killer.
Let me say that at once.
>> And I can't point him out
or tell you his name.
>> The god Apollo
asked this question.
>> He, if anyone,
should tell us the answer.
>> I don't doubt that,
but if you can tell me how a man
persuades a god to speak
when the god doesn't want to,
I shall thank you for it.
>> One other thing
might be worth saying.
>> Second best, admittedly.
>> Second best, third best.
Say what you think.
Any man's opinion is worth
hearing at a time like this.
>> The prophet and astrologer
Tiresias
has studied the mysteries
of men and gods.
>> He has knowledge
and experience and insight.
>> He, more than anyone,
could help us now.
>> Which is why
I have sent for him already.
Nothing, my friends,
has been overlooked.
Creon suggested it.
I've sent for him twice
and expected him here
some time ago.
>> There were rumors,
of course.
>> Gossip in the marketplace.
>> Rumors?
What rumors?
You must tell me everything.
>> That travelers killed him.
>> Somewhere on the roads.
>> I've heard that already.
There are no witnesses.
>> But when your curse
has been made public,
someone may come forward.
>> Hearing that,
it would take a brave man
to keep silent.
>> No murderer fears words
if he can stomach murder.
>> Here comes the man
to tease out the truth.
[low ominous music]
♪ ♪
>> The blind man.
>> The shaman Tiresias.
>> He sees
into the heart of things.
>> And has solved more mysteries
than any man living.
♪ ♪
>> Tiresias.
You have made yourself master of
all the arts of understanding,
both mystic symbolism
and practical wisdom.
The highest spiritual truths
and the most down-to-earth
material realities
are equally your province.
You see the state
of our city,
not with your eyes,
I know,
but with your intellect.
We rely on you
as our spiritual champion.
We sent to the oracle,
you'll have heard that already,
and the answer we were given:
find out the killers
of the old king,
execute them
or banish them,
and only then will your city
be clean.
So maestro,
we need your talents now.
We know that in the formations
of birds in flight
and many other omens,
you can read the future.
For your own sake, for the sake
of the city and for me,
help us to end
this pestilence.
A dead man walks
in our streets,
blinds us with his shadow.
We're in your hands.
The gifted man puts his gifts
to best use
in the service
of his fellow men.
>> Mine is a terrifying gift.
What use is wisdom
when it only leads to suffering?
I knew this before I came
and foolishly forgot it.
I should have stayed at home.
>> That's a gloomy answer.
What's it supposed to mean?
>> Please let me go home.
Things will be best that way.
You will bear your burden.
I will bear mine.
>> Do you refuse
to answer my question?
This is Thebes,
your country.
You were born here.
>> I've heard your proclamation.
It's misconceived.
So it's best for me
to keep silent.
>> Dear gods.
You mean that you know
and won't say?
Look, look around at us,
the whole city.
We're all imploring you
to speak.
>> That is because you are
all blind to what I can see.
I can tell you
the truth is painful,
my secret and yours.
>> You do know it,
don't you?
And you're holding back.
Are you prepared to watch
the whole country die?
>> I'm saving you from agony
and myself.
Don't ask me again.
Don't waste your time.
I shall tell you nothing.
>> Nothing?
What kind of a monster
are you?
A stone statue would be moved
to fury, much less a man.
Do you mean this?
Are you determined
to say nothing?
>> You lose your temper,
make me your scapegoat,
when it's your own anger
you should blame.
>> Do you hear him,
what this man is saying?
This is an insult
to the state.
Every decent citizen
will be outraged.
>> I can't change the future,
only describe it.
What will happen will happen,
whatever I say.
>> It's your duty
to say what you know.
If it must come,
you must tell me.
>> Lose your temper.
Shout, stamp
if that pleases you.
I shall say nothing more.
>> Yes, I shall be angry
and more than angry.
I understand this much.
I understand that you were
implicated,
maybe even planned this murder,
did everything but act it,
and would have done that too,
in my opinion,
if you'd had eyes
to see your victim.
>> Would I, indeed?
You compel me to speak.
The curse you proclaimed
is now upon your head:
from today never to speak to me
or anyone.
You are the man,
the unclean thing,
the dirt that breeds disease.
>> Do you dare to accuse me?
You slander me in public
and think your fortune-telling
gives you some kind of immunity.
>> I don't need it.
The truth is its own protector.
>> Someone's behind this.
Who told you to say that?
There's more to this
than fortune-telling.
>> You did.
You made me say it
against my will.
>> Say it again,
so there will be no doubt.
>> Didn't you hear,
or do you want me to elaborate?
>> I heard,
but I didn't believe my ears.
Say it again,
aloud, to everybody.
>> You are the murderer
of the murdered king!
>> Twice to my face!
You will regret this, old man!
>> Hold your anger
if it pleases you.
I could say more to make you
angrier still.
>> Why not?
More and more lunacy.
Let's have it all.
>> I know, but you do not,
that the woman you love
is not the woman you love,
that the relationship
is disgusting, taboo,
and, in your ignorance,
will destroy you.
>> Do you expect to say such
things and not be punished?
>> The truth protects me
if I tell it honestly.
>> The truth.
What's the truth to you?
You're blind all over--
ears, mind, as well as eyes.
>> I pity you.
People will scream the same
insults at you before long.
Everyone will despise you.
>> You live in darkness
permanently.
You see nothing
of the real world.
My eyes are open.
You can't hurt me.
>> How could I, an old man?
It's not my business.
Apollo will do it.
It's in his hands.
>> Creon, of course.
He went to the oracle.
This plot is his doing,
not yours!
>> Creon isn't your enemy.
You are.
>> Political rank,
wealth and power
and men's ambitions
clawing at each other
till life becomes a battleground
and envy everyone's motive.
Creon is and has been
my friend.
I've trusted him completely.
This crown was given to me
freely by the people.
I didn't ask for it,
and this man, my friend,
is secretly plotting
to overthrow me
with a spiritual quack,
a charlatan,
a paranormal stunt man
whose eyes are stone-blind
when it comes to prophecy
but where money's concerned,
very sharp then, wide-open then.
Astrology, fortune-telling,
forecasting the future,
where was all that
when we needed it?
There was a monster here--
Do you remember?
I'm sure you do.
With the face of a woman
and the body of a dog
who terrorized our city.
Where were you then?
What was your advice
to save this country?
She said a riddle which
no ordinary man could solve.
Someone special was required.
What else are prophets for?
But you!
You hadn't a clue, had you?
Not a word,
not the slightest suggestion.
And then I came along,
a young man, quite ignorant,
knowing nothing, with only
the wit my mother gave me.
But I stopped her mouth.
I did it, Oedipus.
I guessed her riddle without
any gobbledygook about birds,
and I, Oedipus, I am the man
you hope to depose,
you and Creon, so that he will
be king and you his guru.
Well, you will regret it.
You will both regret
this attempt
to turn me into a scapegoat.
If you weren't an old man,
punishment would teach you
the difference
between prophecy and sedition.
>> Great king, to speak in anger
as both of you have done
helps none of us
as far as I can judge
when our city is dying.
>> We must consider the god's
command and how to obey it.
>> You may be king,
but I am a free man,
and I have the right to answer.
I serve Apollo the god,
not you nor Creon.
You sneer at my blindness.
You have eyes but cannot see
your own corruption,
nor who she is
you love the most,
not even whose son you are.
In your ignorance, you have
committed terrible crimes
against those closest to you,
the living and the dead.
A double curse,
like a two-edged sword,
father and mother will drive you
from this city
into exile forever.
And what a cripple
you'll be then.
Those bright eyes, that perfect
vision you are so proud of,
will become dark like mine.
There will be no place on Earth
that has not heard
the sound of your pain.
The wildest heathland
of Cithaeron,
even its cliffs and ravines
will echo to your bellowing
when you understand how those
melodious marriage songs
deceived you when they led you
to that safe harbor
you imagined here.
And unaccountable miseries,
sufferings you cannot guess at
will become familiar both to you
and to your children
as you pile your agonies
upon their heads.
Accuse Creon of every crime.
Slander him.
Despise what I say.
Every man in the world
will despise you,
and no man has committed crimes
like yours.
>> I don't have to
listen to you.
Why should I?
Get him out of my sight now,
at once.
Take him back
where he came from.
>> Yes, I'll go.
You brought me here.
Remember that.
I didn't want to come.
>> If I'd known
what I'd have to listen to,
the ravings of a lunatic,
believe me,
I'd have left you in peace.
>> You think I was born
a fool?
Your parents wouldn't think so.
>> Why this continual harping
upon my parents?
Who fathered me?
>> Today you will father
your own destruction
and conceive the truth
of your birth and death.
>> Speak plainly.
Don't talk in riddles.
>> Why not?
You have a genius
for solving them.
>> Yes.
I'm famous for it.
And your sneers and insults
won't make me
any the less incisive.
>> That fame is your misfortune.
>> I saved the state
with my genius.
What does it matter to me
what you choose to call it?
>> Now I shall go.
Give me your hand, boy.
Take me home.
>> Yes, take him,
and good riddance.
We can do without you.
Rave in your own house
and spare mine.
>> I'll go.
I've said what I came to say,
and I've said it to your face.
Why should I be frightened?
You no longer
have the power to hurt me.
But I will say
one thing more.
The man you're looking for,
the man you cursed
and threatened,
the murderer of Laius,
is here!
He passes for a foreigner
who lives in Thebes,
but he was born here
and will learn that to his cost.
He could see
when he came here.
He will leave blind.
He's a rich man now.
He will go as a beggar,
groping with a stick
in his hand, tapping his way.
He will leave this city
into endless exile.
To his children,
whom he loves,
he is brother and father;
to the woman who bore him,
lover and son;
to his father,
a killer
and the man who supplants him.
Go in.
Set your genius
to solve those riddles.
Call me a blind man
when you've proved them untrue.
[ominous orchestral music]
♪ ♪
[together] Who is this man
whose terrible crime
the unearthly voice
of Apollo's vessel
intones from the rock
of Delphi?
>> Far let that man fly,
for his hands trail blood
from a sin the oracle
blushes to whisper.
>> Faster than the storm
his horse must run,
outstrip the wind.
>> Thundering Zeus' son
gallops behind,
grasps in his fist
the lethal lightning.
>> And the hounds of the gods,
the unsleeping Fates,
close in
like a circle tightening.
>> From the snowbound crest
of Parnassus
the word was transmitted
to Thebes.
[together]
You must find this killer.
>> Lurking like a thief
in the night.
[together]
Drag him into the light.
>> Like a mountain bull,
where the forests are thicker,
the caves bleaker,
he creeps.
[together]
Barred from the company of men.
>> Hopelessly flies the voice
of those bleak prophecies.
[together] That buzz,
that sting at his face.
>> No distance from Earth's
center point.
[together]
Delphi's sacred summit...
>> Is too far for Apollo's
vengeance.
>> Tiresias has spread fear
and confusion.
>> Should we believe him or not?
>> For us, best to keep quiet.
>> I'm like jelly, uncertain
what's happening or will happen.
>> Was there ever a row
in the past?
>> Or is there now?
>> Between Polybus' son
and the ruling line of Thebes,
the house of Labdacus?
>> Not that I ever heard.
>> What could be more absurd
than to blacken...
>> With no proof...
>> Oedipus' name...
>> By pinning this unsolved
murder on him?
>> The secrets of man,
all the mysteries
of his nature,
are known to Zeus
and Apollo.
>> No one can claim
a monopoly of wisdom.
>> One teacher is as good
as another,
perhaps no better
than any of us.
>> Some may see deeper,
and some may not,
because wisdom is a juncture
unequally shared among men.
>> But what was done
must be known beyond doubt.
>> Oedipus saved our state.
>> He publicly outwitted
the Sphinx.
>> Like gold, he was tested
and found true.
[together]
We must see his guilt proved.
[up-tempo orchestral music]
♪ ♪
>> Citizens,
members of the Council,
they tell me the king has
charged me with subversion.
I am innocent
of any such charge.
The city is on its knees.
Does he imagine,
at a time like this,
I would injure him
by any word or action?
I'd rather die
than be smeared like that.
It is a smear
to be accused of treason
before you and my friends
and my countrymen.
>> He lost his temper
and made wild accusations.
>> I think he spoke
without thought.
>> Did he say
that the old prophet lied
under my instructions?
Who gave him that idea?
>> He did say it.
>> But why he said it
or whether he meant it
is a matter of opinion.
>> Is he right in the head?
Did he speak rationally
and look you in the eye,
or has he gone mad?
>> I've got more common sense
than to make judgments
like that on a king's actions.
>> Here he comes
from the palace.
He'll speak for himself.
>> So you're here.
What have you come for?
I hardly imagined
you'd be thick-skinned enough
to come knocking
at my doors again
when you're planning
to murder me and take my power.
Do you imagine I'm afraid of you
or stupid,
or am I just too blind
to notice a conspiracy
to overthrow me
or not bright enough
to do anything about it?
Fine, what a conspiracy.
You need plenty of friends
and financial backing
to capture a throne.
Revolutions are made with men
and the money to pay them
or buy them!
>> Can I speak in my own
defense?
Judge me when you've heard
my answer, not before.
>> Creon, you've always been
a brilliant talker,
but talk cuts no ice with me.
I've seen the evidence
of your actions--
betrayal, sedition!
>> Can you let me speak?
>> Say what you like, but don't
protest your innocence.
That would be too much.
>> Do you really think
that closing your mind,
a boneheaded refusal
to listen,
is a sensible way
of proceeding?
>> Do you really think
that I can allow you
to plot a palace revolution
and do nothing about it
because you're my
brother-in-law?
>> Only a fool would allow that,
I agree,
if it were happening.
There is no revolution
in the palace or anywhere.
No conspiracy.
What am I supposed to have done?
>> It was you who advised me
to send for that
canting prophet.
>> Yes, it was good advice.
I'd give it again.
>> Tell me,
how long ago did Laius--
>> Did Laius what?
I don't follow you.
>> He died mysteriously.
How long ago was that?
>> Years and years.
I can hardly remember.
>> Yeah,
and this fortune-teller,
he was here then, already
in the prophecy business.
>> Respected then as now
for his steel and integrity.
>> And did he mention me
when the murder happened?
>> Not in my hearing.
>> And did you not hold
an inquest
or some kind of investigation?
>> There was an inquiry,
but it revealed nothing.
>> And this respected prophet,
why did he say nothing then
of what he has said today?
>> I have no idea.
I never say anything
unless I'm in full possession
of the facts.
>> But one thing you do know,
and you'd be wise to tell me.
>> What can I say?
Everything I know
I'll tell you.
I'll keep nothing back.
>> You know this much:
without your prompting,
the fortune-teller would never
have dared to accuse me
of the murder of Laius.
>> Did he say that?
Then you must know whether
he's lying or telling the truth,
not I.
Am I permitted
to interrogate you?
>> Why not?
I've got nothing to hide.
You will never pin this murder
on me.
>> Are you married
to my sister?
>> What kind of a question
is that?
I can hardly deny it,
can I?
I do have that honor.
>> She shares the throne,
both title and revenue.
>> Of course she does.
What's mine is hers.
>> And I am the third partner.
I have my share of power
and responsibilities.
>> You've always had it.
All the more disgusting
to conspire against me
behind my back.
>> But I haven't conspired
against you.
Ask yourself,
as I ask myself,
whether any sane man
would willingly exchange
a quiet life
within the ruling family
for the wear and tear,
the grueling responsibility
of government.
It has never crossed my mind.
I have no ambition to be king
in name or in fact.
I live like a king,
sometimes I hope I act like one,
and that's enough.
No sensible man
would want more than that.
If I had your job,
there'd be too many things
I wouldn't like doing
and no more satisfaction
from the kingship itself
than I get now from royal rank
without royal obligations.
I'm not so drunk
with the prospect of power
as to envy a position
that yields no profit.
Look at me now.
Everyone knows me.
Everyone loves me,
I think.
Anyone who seeks to get
your attention
first tries for mine
because my influence
guarantees success.
Why should I change
such a favorable situation?
Is it likely
I'd be such a fool
as to break with you
in such conditions
as far as to commit treason?
As a political policy,
it has nothing to recommend it.
It's not mine nor the policy
of any of my friends,
not if I know them.
If you want proof,
send to the priestess
at the oracle.
Check the message I brought,
if it was true.
Produce some evidence
of conspiracy
between the blind man
and me.
Prove that and condemn me
to death out of hand.
My verdict in those conditions
will be as merciless
as any man's.
But to condemn me like this
without any evidence,
I cannot endure that.
If mere supposition,
unsupported,
is all your evidence,
you can call bad men honest
and decent citizens
crooks and villains,
and justice will be done
to none of them.
A reliable friend
is a precious possession
worth a man's life.
Throw friendship away,
you destroy something living
and irreplaceable.
The truth of this
will emerge in time.
Time is the one
incorruptible judge.
One minute is long enough
to accuse a man.
To prove his innocence
takes longer.
>> If you weigh his words,
they make good sense,
well worth
a prudent man's consideration.
>> Quick judgments
are not always the wisest.
>> Conspiracies
don't take their time.
They keep on the move,
and counterintelligence
must move fast too
or be caught napping.
Shall I sit and do nothing
while he takes power
and my own sluggishness
destroys me?
>> What do you want, then,
to have me banished?
>> Banished?
Oh, no.
I want you dead.
>> What have I done
to provoke such jealousy?
>> Are you still so obstinate?
Still pretending?
>> Yes, I am, because
you're not thinking straight.
>> I know where
my best interests lie.
>> And what about mine?
>> You are a traitor!
>> And you are mistaken!
>> Kings must take decisions!
>> Not wrong decisions!
>> Oh, Thebes, my city!
>> Thebes is my city
as well as yours!
>> Princes, stop this brawling.
>> The queen.
>> Jocasta
is coming from the palace.
>> She will help us
to put an end to this quarrel.
>> What is all this shouting?
From inside the palace,
I heard angry voices
like a quarrel.
Aren't you ashamed?
Indulging yourself in private
arguments, squabbling like boys
while the city dies
all around you.
Go inside, my husband.
And you too.
Creon, go back
to your own house
before you turn a private row
into a public spectacle.
>> Sister,
we are blood relations,
but your husband
has condemned me unheard
to the choice of death or exile.
>> Certainly, I have,
and that, dear wife,
is the least I can do.
>> May all the gods
curse me forever
if I was even remotely guilty.
>> Oedipus,
you must believe him.
An oath like that
can't be taken lightly.
Believe him, for my sake,
and for the sake
of these reliable councilors.
They heard it all.
[together] Great king,
be prepared to change your mind.
>> Are you asking me
to break my word?
[together] No man ever
questioned his integrity.
He confirms it by oath.
Show some leniency.
>> Do you know
what you're asking?
[together]
Certainly, we do.
>> Say it openly, then.
Let everyone know.
[together]
He's your long-trusted friend,
above suspicion.
Don't condemn him
by hearsay
and in spite of his oath.
>> Don't you understand
your own implications?
Spare him, and you demand
my banishment or death.
>> By the life-giving sun,
that necessary power
by whose warmth we live,
such a terrible thought
never crossed my mind.
>> I had far rather be
an outcast--
godless, friendless, despised,
and distraught--
than embrace such a destiny.
>> Our city's in anguish.
What greater blow
could fall on us in our misery
than anger and hatred
between you two?
>> Then let him go,
even if my death, exile,
or disgrace
is the price of his mercy.
Your voice buys his pardon,
not his.
Wherever he hides his face,
then my backbreaking hatred
be his burden.
>> Your apology's as graceless
as your anger's insane.
An unforgiving nature breeds
misery in its own heart,
not that of its enemy.
>> Leave me alone!
I want you gone!
>> Yes, I'll go.
They respect my integrity.
I am misjudged by you alone.
[together]
Take the king inside, madam.
Speak to him in private.
>> What caused this quarrel?
Who began it?
[together]
Rumors were mentioned,
unfounded suspicions,
then the anger that follows
unjust accusations.
>> Both men were at fault, then?
[together]
Yes, madam, they were.
>> Tell me all the details.
You can speak without fear.
[together]
We have troubles enough.
Best to keep silent
in all our interests.
Let sleeping dogs lie.
>> Your intentions
are honorable,
but your advice
is pregnant with disaster.
All the guilt falls on me.
>> Great king, believe me
when I say again
what I have said before.
We would be stark mad to council
an action so insane
as to cast you out
without proof.
>> We need your help
and guidance.
>> We all remember how,
like a pilot
in that desperate storm,
half-wrecked,
you navigated us to harbor.
[together] You are our captain
in rough weather or calm.
>> Please tell me,
what harm can Creon have done
to provoke such fury
so suddenly?
I am worthy your trust.
>> These old men mean well,
but you matter to me far more.
It's Creon.
I'm sickened with disgust
at the scope of his conspiracy.
>> What conspiracy?
And why do you accuse
my brother?
>> He says I'm responsible
for Laius' murder.
>> Has he any evidence,
or is it hearsay?
>> He says nothing himself.
That corrupt fortune-teller
speaks for him
with his bird talk
and prophecy.
>> And is that all?
Set your mind at rest.
No one can forecast the future.
I know what I'm talking about
from personal experience.
I have proof.
When Laius was alive,
an oracle told him--
not the god himself
but through his mouthpiece--
that he would be killed
by his own son,
our own child,
and it didn't happen.
Laius was killed
by persons unknown,
foreign robbers,
according to the story,
at the place
where three roads meet.
As for the child, it was
abandoned on a deserted mountain
before it was three days old
by a servant.
Kings never commit such acts
themselves.
To make doubly sure,
its ankles were pierced
and strapped together
with leather thongs,
so that prediction
didn't come true.
In spite of Apollo,
the prophecy of parricide
wasn't fulfilled.
Laius was murdered but not,
as he feared, by his own son.
The oracle had been unambiguous,
its meaning quite plain.
So why take notice of these
fortune-tellers and astrologers?
The gods always get their
own way without anyone's help
when they're ready.
>> Something you said...
Jocasta, I remember...
My brains are turmoil.
Feelings, memories.
>> Why do you look at me
so strangely?
What's the matter?
>> You said, didn't you,
that Laius was butchered
at a place
where three roads meet?
>> Yes, that was said
at the time.
It's still the common story.
>> Where?
What country?
>> A place in Phocis
near the junction
where the road to Thebes
forks to Daulia and Delphi.
>> And how long ago
did all this happen?
>> You hadn't arrived.
The news became public
a short while
before you became king.
>> Oh, Zeus.
What will you do to me?
>> Oedipus, you look terrified.
What have I said?
>> Not yet.
Don't ask me yet.
How old was Laius?
What kind of man was he?
>> Big man, hair graying,
about your build.
>> Dear god, without knowing it,
I may have damned myself
just a moment ago.
>> Don't look at me like that.
What do you mean?
>> Maybe Tiresias
could see after all.
Terrifying but possible.
Tell me one more thing.
>> Why are you frightening me?
I'll tell you everything.
>> Who was with the king?
A few attendants?
Or was he traveling in state
with servants and armed men?
>> Five men all told,
one of them a herald.
Laius himself
rode in a carriage.
>> [gasps]
Nothing could be
clearer than that.
Every detail.
Where did you get
this information?
>> There was one survivor.
Eventually,
he got back to Thebes.
>> And is he still here now?
>> No, he isn't.
By the time he got back,
everything had changed
in the city.
You were king in Laius' place.
When he saw how things were,
he came to me
and begged me
on his knees
to let him go back
to the country
to be a shepherd.
He said he wanted to be
done with Thebes--
out of sight,
out of mind.
So I let him go.
He was a good servant.
He deserved better than that.
>> I want him here at once,
today.
Can we find him?
>> Of course, we can.
But why are you
so anxious?
>> Oh, my dear wife.
I'm frightened of what
I've done, what I'm doing.
I've already said far too much.
I must see the shepherd,
ask him some questions.
>> You will see him.
We'll send for him,
but why are you so worried?
You must tell me.
I do have a right to know.
>> Oh, yes, yes.
You have a right to know.
If the truth of this
is what I think it is,
no one has
a better right to know than you.
I'll tell you the whole story.
My father, Polybus,
was Corinth-born,
and Merope, my mother,
came from Daulis.
I was an up-and-coming fellow,
very much the man to watch,
until one day,
an odd thing happened,
an astonishing thing
which caused more trouble
perhaps than it merited
but which I took seriously.
At a banquet one day,
a man who had drunk too much
jeered at me and said
I was not my father's son.
I was very hurt, angry,
and insulted,
but I kept it to myself
for the rest of that day.
The next morning,
I went to my parents,
both father and mother together,
and asked them question
after question,
almost compelling them
to tell me the truth.
They were very angry that anyone
should dare say such a thing
and put my mind at rest
as best they could,
but a thing like that
gets under your skin.
I couldn't forget it,
and the story got around
a good deal, as these things do,
so without telling my parents,
I went to the oracle at Delphi.
I got no answer
to the question I asked,
a catalog of horrors
and miseries instead:
that I would marry
my own mother
and father children on her,
conceived incestuously,
and become
a public outcast for it,
notorious throughout the world.
As if this weren't enough,
I would kill my own father.
What could I do?
I ran as fast and as far
from Corinth as any man could,
always checking my distance
from that forbidden city
by the position of the stars
so that
those dreadful prophecies
could not possibly come true.
The route I took brought me
into that part of the country
where, according to you,
Laius was murdered.
Now, listen, Jocasta.
This is the truth
in every detail.
I reached a place
where three roads meet.
I was confronted by a herald
ahead of a carriage
drawn by horses
and carrying a passenger
just as you described:
gray-haired, my build.
The man in front shouted at me
to clear the road,
and the old man, too,
rudely ordered me
to get out of his way.
The driver barged into me,
so I hit him, hard!
I was furious by now,
uncontrollable,
but the old man in the carriage
was watching for his chance.
He waited till I passed him,
and then he struck me
full on the head
with his two-pronged stick,
the kind you use for goading
the horses to make them gallop.
I paid him back with interest
and double-quick.
I whacked him savagely
with my staff
and knocked him
out of the carriage.
He fell flat in the road.
The others attacked me,
of course,
and I killed them, every one.
Now, if that old man was
remotely connected with Laius,
if the king's blood
ran in his veins,
is there any man on Earth
more miserable than I am?
Every god will hate me,
and all men.
No one will speak to me,
friend nor stranger.
No one will take me
into his house.
I cursed the murderer,
and the weight of that curse
now falls on me.
These same hands that murdered
him have fondled his wife.
Was I cursed
from the beginning, then?
A filthy, corrupted thing,
infecting the city,
deserving exile
if anyone deserves it.
Now I am cast out from Thebes,
denied the sight of my wife
and children,
forbidden never to return
to my home in Corinth.
No, never again
can I go back there
for fear that the oracle's
prophecies might be fulfilled
and that I should somehow marry
my mother and kill my father,
Polybus, who nurtured me
and gave me life.
The immortals, I suppose, have
devised this inhuman scenario
to amuse themselves,
but listen, gods,
as you revel in the purity of
your power over human affairs,
I shall do my best to deprive
you of that pleasure.
Never, never will that day come
if I can prevent it.
I'd rather die with every memory
of my existence
blotted out from the face
of the Earth
than live to see
such dreadful things come true
and be shamed, branded,
and notorious before humanity.
>> Your story is terrifying,
great king.
>> But don't give up hope.
There was an eyewitness.
>> Until you've questioned him,
say nothing.
>> The shepherd
is my last chance.
I'll cling to that.
>> Even when he gets here,
what possible help can he be?
>> One detail,
and it's crucial.
If his story corroborates yours,
I am proved innocent.
>> What detail?
Does it matter?
What did I say?
>> In your version
of the shepherd's evidence,
the king was killed by robbers.
Robbers, plural.
Now, if he says the same,
still calls them robbers,
I'm in the clear.
One man is not a group of men.
Plural is plural,
not singular.
But if he describes
a single traveler walking alone,
then quite obviously,
all the evidence
will point to me.
>> Oh, but he did say that.
I'm certain.
He can't change his story now.
He spoke in public.
The whole city heard him.
And even if his evidence
varies in detail,
by no possible stretch
of the imagination
can he pretend
that Laius died as predicted.
A son of mine would kill him,
the oracle said,
and it didn't happen.
My poor little boy
killed no one.
He was the one who died,
years before
any of this happened.
That's how much
oracles are worth.
In future, whatever they say,
one way or the other,
I won't waste my time
with any of them.
>> That's the truth
of the matter.
But we'll speak to the shepherd.
Send someone to fetch him now,
this minute.
>> At once,
we'll get him at once.
Come inside.
I'll do nothing
without your approval, nothing.
[solemn orchestral music]
♪ ♪
[together]
I only ask for an honest life
and justice and belief
in the moral law
as the gods decreed it from
the ancient summit of Olympus,
the sacred mountain.
>> No man made those precepts.
>> They never sleep nor decay
with age as men decay.
>> They run their courses
from immortal sources.
>> Like a pure and eternal
fountain.
[together] Arrogant self-love
breeds absolute rule,
the tyrant who eats up money
and men.
He seeks absolute power
and, in one foolish hour,
overreaches himself
and ends in the gutter.
>> An ambitious man
most honors the gods.
>> When his demon drives him
to serve the state...
>> He sets his store
by the moral law.
>> The gods love him,
and his people prosper.
[together] But what if a man
should laugh at justice,
grab what he wants,
and disregard by his words
and actions
honesty and truth
and plunder holy shrines?
Can he hope to escape
the consequences of his rape?
When the criminal makes off
with his loot
and the murderer becomes king,
why should I still cling
to the old wisdom and morality
or honor in song
the sacred harmony?
And why should I make
pilgrimages
to Delphi or Olympia
or any holy place
if these manifest truths are not
made absolute for every man,
and the gods' warnings
provoke laughter
with no thought
of what comes after?
Oh, Zeus, universal,
if you hear our song,
show us again
your immortal power
in this darkest hour
when Laius' fate
and Apollo's word
are both forgotten
and your warnings unheard.
>> I have decided,
senators of Thebes,
to visit the holiest temples
of the city
to make sacrifices there
with incense and flowers
to the all-powerful gods.
The king is confused
at the moment
by his own nightmares
and fantasies.
He can't make balanced
judgments
or estimate from past experience
what is likely to happen.
Each new, sensational revelation
he takes as truth
and is terrified the more.
I've tried to comfort him,
but I've failed.
So it seems sensible
to offer prayers,
and first to Apollo,
whose altar stands nearest.
Brilliant god of sunlight
and healing,
we stand in the shadow
of a curse.
Shine on our darkest corners.
Where there is sickness
and dirt,
make us whole and clean.
Like desperate sailors,
we lose our last hope
when we see our captain
in despair.
>> Gentlemen.
Can anyone show me the way
to the palace of King Oedipus?
Or better still,
to the man himself,
if you know where he is.
>> This is the palace,
and the king is inside it.
>> This lady is his wife
and mother of his children.
>> God bless her, then,
and all her family,
bearing children
to such a great man.
>> God bless you too, sir,
and thank you
for such a courteous greeting.
Have you traveled here
for your own purpose
or to bring us news?
>> News, dear lady,
good news too,
for your husband
and for his whole family.
>> What news is it?
Who sent you?
>> I come from Corinth,
and my message
is bound to please you,
though it's painful too
and will make you sad
to begin with.
>> One message causing
two such opposite reactions.
Tell me.
>> The Corinthians
will make Oedipus king
of the whole isthmus.
Everybody says so.
>> But Polybus rules in Corinth
and has done for years.
Isn't he still king?
>> Polybus is dead, my lady,
and buried.
>> Polybus is dead.
The father of Oedipus, dead.
>> Unless I'm a liar.
In which case,
strike me dead on the spot.
>> You, girl, quickly,
run to the king.
Tell him the news.
Ooh, oracles, dreamers
of dreams, fortune-tellers,
where are your predictions now?
The one man Oedipus has kept
clear of all these years
for fear he should murder him,
and that man is dead
at long last.
Dead, and Oedipus had nothing
to do with it.
>> Jocasta, my dearest,
you called me out
from the palace again.
What's going on?
>> This man has news for you;
listen,
and then tell me what you think
of oracles
with their mystification
and mumbo jumbo.
>> Who is he?
What does he have to say?
>> He comes from Corinth.
Your father, he's dead.
Polybus--do you understand me--
is dead.
>> What?
Tell me yourself.
Get it quite clear.
>> I can't put it any plainer;
he's dead, all right.
He is gone the way we all go.
>> How did he die?
Was it murder or sickness?
>> Sleep comes easily
to an old man's eyes.
>> He was ill, then,
and gradually declined.
Poor old man.
>> He was old and tired.
He'd lived long enough.
>> Well, then.
Ha!
What now, Jocasta!
That priestess at Delphi
with her oracle.
A whole sky full of screaming
birds prophesying ruin.
I was the man who would kill
my father,
and my sword has never left
its scabbard.
Perhaps he died
of a broken heart
because I was in exile.
Perhaps I killed him that way,
but I don't think so.
Polybus is dead,
and so is the oracle
and all its prophecies,
dead and rotten.
>> And that was my prophecy.
Didn't I say so
right from the beginning?
>> You said it, but I was
confused and frightened.
>> Forget it now.
It's over.
>> My mother, while she's alive,
I can't be safe.
There's still that to fear.
>> Fear, why fear?
We live our lives
at the mercy of chance,
the purest coincidence.
No one can predict the future,
so what's the point
of fearing it?
Live. Enjoy life.
Take each day as it comes.
As for marrying your mother,
you're not the first man
to have dreamed that dream.
Every man is his mother's lover
in imagination or in daydreams.
It's commonplace.
If a man dwells
on his most private fantasies,
his life won't be worth living;
believe me.
>> Yeah, that's all very well,
your celebrations of the woman
who brought me into the world
happened to be dead too,
but she isn't, not yet.
She's alive,
and while she lives,
somewhere inside me,
I'm still afraid.
>> But much less afraid;
your father's dead.
>> Less afraid,
maybe still afraid of her.
>> Don't mind me asking, sir,
who is this lady
who scares you so much?
>> The queen, Merope,
the dead king's wife.
>> What's she done?
There's nothing to scare you
about her, surely.
>> My friend, there was
an oracle once from Delphi,
dreadful prophecy.
>> Too dreadful
to tell a stranger,
or can anyone hear it?
>> No, it's no secret.
Apollo's mouthpiece,
the Pythia herself,
told me I was doomed
to marry my own mother
and kill my father bloodily
with my own hands.
It's for this reason
that I left Corinth
and have stayed away
so long.
I've prospered, as you see,
abroad,
but nothing can compensate
for the loss
of my parents' love,
the pleasure denied me
of seeing them face-to-face.
>> And this is the fear
that's kept you in exile?
No other reason?
>> Well, it was enough.
I was determined
not to kill my father.
>> Well, I came to do you
one good turn,
and now I can do you another.
>> What other?
If you know more,
you'll earn my gratitude.
>> That was partly my motive
in coming, I will admit,
and to do myself
a good turn later,
when you come back home.
>> Home?
You mean Corinth?
I shall never go back.
I shall never see either
of my parents again.
>> My dear young fellow,
you've got it all wrong.
>> What do you mean, old man?
Well, for god's sake, tell me.
Tell me everything you know.
>> This fear of yours
that stops you coming home.
>> The fear that the god's
prediction should come true.
>> Is it all that
about your parents
and the crime
you're doomed to commit?
>> Well, of course it is.
And from the very first moment,
that fear has never left me.
>> Pointless, sir.
Quite without basis.
Nothing to be scared of
at all.
>> Why?
I don't understand you.
If I'm their son...
>> Who says you're their son?
Polybus wasn't your father.
No relation at all.
>> What are you saying?
Polybus wasn't my father?
>> No more your father
than I am
and just the same relationship,
in fact.
>> The same relationship,
my father and you.
How is that possible?
>> It's possible because
that man was not your father,
and neither am I.
>> Then why did he call me
his son?
>> I gave you to him
as a present.
>> Gave me to him?
But he loved me like a son;
no father could have done more.
>> He had no children
and wanted a child.
>> What was I, then?
A foundling or a slave child
bought somewhere?
>> Not a bit of it.
You were found on the mountain
in a hollow under some trees
up there on Cithaeron.
>> And what were you doing
up there?
>> Looking after the sheep.
That was my job.
>> And what were you,
a journeyman shepherd
taking whatever work came?
>> That's right.
And a good thing for you
that I was, eh, son?
Because I saved your life;
no question about that.
>> What, was I in danger, then,
or in pain?
>> In pain.
Look at your ankles.
They're still swollen up
more than normal.
>> What's that to do with it?
An old weakness I've had
since a child.
>> I know you have.
Your ankles were drilled through
and tied together.
I cut you free.
>> It must be true.
I can still see the scars.
I had them as a boy.
>> How else did you get
your name?
Oedipus, "swollen foot."
Well, that's what it means,
isn't it?
>> Dear gods.
Who would do such a thing
to a child,
my father or my mother?
>> Don't ask me that.
Ask the other chap,
the one who gave you to me.
>> Gave me?
You didn't find me yourself?
>> I did not.
There was another shepherd.
He gave you to me and asked me
to look after you.
>> And who was he?
Could you identify him?
>> He was always thought of
as one of Laius' men.
>> Laius?
The Laius who was king here
before?
>> King Laius, that's the one.
This chap worked for him.
>> And is he still alive?
Where can I see him?
>> Ask your own people.
They should know.
>> This shepherd,
good people,
do any of you know him?
Have any of you seen him here
or in the country?
If you know this man,
for god's sake, say.
Speak up now.
The time has come to solve
this mystery once and for all.
>> I think that this shepherd
and the shepherd you've already
sent for must be identical.
>> But ask the queen.
She's sure to know.
>> Jocasta,
you know the shepherd,
the one we've sent for.
Is it the same man?
>> What man?
What does it matter,
one shepherd or another?
None of it matters.
Forget it, the whole thing.
Don't pursue it.
>> Forget it?
Of course I can't forget it;
what nonsense.
My birth's a mystery,
but with all these clues,
I intend to solve it.
>> Listen to me.
In heaven's name, listen.
If you want to stay alive,
this search must end.
It's making me ill.
I'm sick with it already.
Isn't that enough?
>> There's no need
for such gloom.
>> [screams]
>> Suppose it proved
that I was born a slave
from generations of slaves.
Would that sicken you
or affect your standing?
>> Listen, I'm begging you,
don't go on.
>> I must go on.
I must know the truth.
>> I know!
I know what I'm talking about.
I'm telling you this
for your own good.
>> And when did I ever put
my own good, as you call it,
above the service of the state?
>> My god, you're doomed.
You can't escape.
I have one wish
and one wish only:
that you never discover
who you really are.
>> Hurry, one of you,
fetch that shepherd here.
My wife is too proud
of her blue blood.
She's scared she may have
married a slave.
>> It's finished.
No chance now.
You're doomed.
I've said all there is to say
and my last word to you
forever.
>> Why has the queen left us
so suddenly?
>> Why did she become
so emotional?
>> I don't like it,
this refusal to speak.
>> It's like the silence
that hangs over a city
when a storm
is about to break.
>> Storms, hurricanes,
let them all come.
I've traveled this far,
and now I'm determined
to discover my identity.
If my birthplace was the gutter,
I shall hunt it out.
My wife,
like all women,
is snobbish about rank
and upbringing.
If I was the child of chance
with good luck
for my godparents,
I wouldn't be ashamed.
My true mother
is fortunate coincidence.
My brothers and sisters,
the changing seasons,
and I change with them
as naturally as the trees.
If that's my background,
who could ask for better?
I am what I am.
I have no wish to be otherwise.
But who I am,
that I must know,
and I will know it.
[twittery orchestral music]
♪ ♪
[together]
If I could foretell the future,
either by prophecy
or common sense,
I'd predict
that by tomorrow morning,
this truth will be dawning.
That mysterious Cithaeron,
that magical mountain,
was father and mother and nurse
to Oedipus, our king.
And our voices will sing praises
for his outlandish birth,
that child of the earth,
and glory to Apollo
and thanksgiving.
both: Or perhaps some
sky-borned Olympian
brought him to birth,
an immortal mother.
both: Maybe Pan, who goes
roaming the slopes at evening.
both: Seduced a wild goddess
of woodland or scree.
both: Or Apollo,
who relishes high pasture,
bred a son from a spirit.
both: Or Hermes, in his summit
of Cyllene, did the deed.
both: Or was Dionysus'
passionate seed sown on Helicon?
[together]
Where a nymph lay dreaming.
>> Elder statesmen of Thebes,
I think I can see the man
we're waiting for.
I'm making a guess.
I never set eyes on him,
but my men are bringing him,
and he looks the same age
as this man from Corinth.
Is he the one?
You should know him;
you've seen him before.
>> I recognize him.
This is the man.
>> He was Laius' servant
and honest as the day.
>> Now, friend from Corinth,
you speak first.
Is this the man you mean?
>> It is.
>> And you, old shepherd,
look me in the eye...
And answer my questions.
Did you work
for old King Laius?
>> Yes, sir, I did.
I was born and bred
in his service,
not bought in the market.
>> And what was your job here?
How were you employed?
>> For most of my life,
I've been a shepherd, sir.
>> And where?
In what part of the country
did you usually work?
>> Well, it would be
Cithaeron mostly,
all around there.
>> And this fellow here,
have you ever seen him before?
>> What man do you mean, sir?
How would I know him?
>> This man,
standing here.
Did you have any dealings
with him ever that you remember?
>> I can't say,
not just this minute.
I can't remember.
>> Of course he's forgotten,
but I'll soon remind him.
The days when us two were
neighbors up there on Cithaeron,
he won't forget that,
will you?
He had two flocks,
and I had one.
Three seasons altogether
we were up there, the two of us.
And then from spring
right through to the autumn,
then I drove my lot
down to Corinth,
and he took his lot
down to Thebes to Laius' place.
Now, is that true,
or isn't it?
>> Well, true enough.
It's a long time ago.
>> In that case, you won't have
forgotten that boy,
the baby you gave me.
You told me to look after it
and bring it up as my own.
>> Why are you
asking about that?
It's years ago.
>> And he's a grown man.
My dear old mate,
this is that baby.
>> God damn you, be quiet!
Keep your mouth shut.
>> Now, now, old fellow.
You deserve that sharp tone
more than he does.
>> Why, great king?
What have I done wrong?
>> Not giving a straight answer
to a straight question.
He was asking you
about the child.
>> It's just talk.
He knows nothing.
He doesn't understand.
>> Now, listen.
If you won't speak willingly,
you'll be forced to speak.
>> I'm an old man, sir.
Don't hurt me,
for god's sake.
>> You two, twist his arms back,
quickly.
>> Oh!
God help me now.
What have I done?
What more do you want to know?
>> This man here
was asking you about a child.
Was it you who gave him
that child?
Was it?
>> Yes, it was me.
I wish I had died that day.
>> You'll die today
unless you tell the truth.
>> I'll die if I tell it anyway;
that's for sure.
>> This fellow is still
determined to prevaricate.
>> No, no, I'm not.
I told you I gave it him.
What else?
>> Where did it come from?
Was it your child?
Or did someone give it to you?
>> Not mine.
Would I give my own child away?
It came from...
someone else.
>> Who else?
From Thebes?
From one of the citizens here?
What kind of house
did that baby come from?
>> I beg you, sir,
by all the gods,
don't ask me that.
>> I am asking.
If I must ask again,
you are as good as dead.
>> Well, you see,
it was born in Laius' house.
>> A slave?
Or was it a blood relation?
>> I'm on the edge, sir.
Must I say it?
>> Yes, we're both on the edge.
I must hear you say it.
>> They did say it was his,
but the queen in the palace,
she could tell you.
>> Do you mean
she gave it to you?
>> Yes, sir, she did.
>> Why?
For what purpose?
>> To kill it, sir.
>> Her own child,
poor woman.
>> Yes, sir,
there was some prophecy.
She was scared stiff.
>> What prophecy?
>> There was talk that the boy
would kill his father.
>> And why, in the name
of all the gods,
did you give it to this man?
>> I couldn't kill it, master.
I couldn't do it.
A little boy,
three days old.
I thought he'll take it miles
away to his own country.
It'll be all right.
So he took it
and saved its life,
and now it's all turned out
like this.
If you are that man, sir,
the boy my friend
took to Corinth,
you were marked out
for suffering
from the day you were born.
>> All...
All of it.
I know it all now.
Nothing left to find.
It all came true,
every single word.
Let the night come.
Daylight has no mercy.
It shows too much
too clearly.
Yes, my parenthood
a crime,
my marriage
and that murder
committed on my own father.
I see it all now.
[somber orchestral music]
♪ ♪
[together] Like a shadow
thrown in the dust
is the short life of man.
>> The sunlit generations
pass into the night.
>> And happiness,
like a bird in flight,
flutters and is gone.
>> We have seen Oedipus the king
brought down to misery.
>> Suffering,
brief happiness, pain,
is mortal man's destiny.
[together]
Like a champion marksman,
he shot down the Sphinx
in full flight.
>> The master of the gods'
reward was kingship
and power over men.
>> The prize of one hour
of brilliant insight.
>> From that day,
he was king in Thebes.
>> Like a solid wall,
his power surrounded us,
and we sang of the benefits
of his rule.
[together] Was there ever
a reversal of fortune
more terrible than this?
>> How can any man endure
such merciless agony?
>> Who was ever marked out
by destiny
for suffering like his?
>> Oedipus,
world-famous king,
when you sucked and fondled
at the same breast...
>> How could the flesh
keep silent so long
where both son and father
caressed?
[together]
Time is an all-seeing eye
that searches out hidden guilt
when it seems most secure.
>> Then brings down
the knife...
>> On the father
and son who shared a wife.
>> And the blood
that was spilt.
>> Son of our murdered king,
why did you ever come here?
>> Your destiny leaves me
choking with tears.
[together]
Bringing salvation for us
with your own misery.
>> Senators!
Councilors!
Wise men of the city,
if you have any feeling at all
for the royal family of Thebes,
those descendants
of Labdacus,
you can't hold back
your tears,
not when you hear
what I have to tell you
and see yourself the terrible
scene in the palace.
In there,
things have been done,
deliberate things
of such horror,
such self-mutilations,
that rivers could not wash away
the blood,
and the stain on the family
will be everlasting.
>> Haven't we seen
and suffered enough?
>> What more is there to say?
>> First of all,
in the plainest language,
the queen is dead.
>> Dead?
>> How can she be dead?
>> Poor woman.
>> I'll tell you how.
She killed herself.
You haven't seen it,
and count yourselves lucky.
I shall never
be able to forget it.
That image
will always be with me now.
I was there,
and I'll tell you what happened
as accurately as I can.
When she rushed into the palace
in anguish,
she went straight
into the bedroom,
tearing her hair out in handfuls
and muttering like a madwoman.
She slammed the doors
and locked herself in,
and we heard her shouting,
something about Laius,
her first husband,
who's been dead for years,
and the night they conceived
the son who was to kill him
and breed misbegotten children
on his own mother.
Then it became confused.
She screamed
and beat upon the bed
where she had conceived
a husband by a husband
and children by a child.
I heard all that.
Her actual death
was behind the locked doors,
and Oedipus broke in
at that point,
raving up and down the hall
and shouting for a sword
so that all our eyes
were fixed on him,
and we all forgot
what she was doing.
"That wife of mine,
that wife and mother,"
he shouted.
"Her fertile belly,
twice it's been harvested,
me and my children."
Then he suddenly
made for the door.
None of us told him,
as though some premonition
suddenly told him
she was there.
He bellowed and shouted
and shoulder-charged the doors
and kicked them till the bolts
and hinges shattered,
and he stumbled in.
We saw her slowly turning
in the air,
swinging slightly
like a pendulum,
strung up by the neck.
She'd hanged herself.
The king ran to her,
loosed the ropes,
and lifted her down,
all the while groaning
heartbreakingly like an animal.
He laid her gently on the floor,
and then...
This was unbearable,
the worst of all.
There were two golden brooches
pinned on her dress.
He opened them up,
lifted them high in the air
at arm's length,
and plunged them down
into his eyeballs,
screaming and groaning
that his own guilt and suffering
were too great for his eyes
ever to see it,
that now, they would both be
in darkness forever,
that he would never see again
those he should never have seen,
nor ever love those
he should never have loved.
That's the way he went on,
cursing himself and stabbing
his eyelids again and again
till his face was a mass
of blood and tears;
not drops of blood
but like a thunderstorm
or cloudburst
gushing down his cheeks.
So they embraced in the crime
and embraced
in the punishment too,
man and wife together.
They were happy, you know,
for a long time.
The family was famous
and considered fortunate.
But from today,
horror, pain, and grief,
all the suffering
men have a name for
will make their names
notorious forever.
>> Has he any relief?
>> Or is the pain getting worse?
>> He's yelling for someone
to unbolt the doors
and drag him out
so that all Thebes will see
the father-killer and mother...
I can't say that word in public.
He's shouting repeatedly that he
must be kicked out of the city.
He's exiled by his own decree.
He mustn't stay long enough
to let the curse
fall on his own family.
But he's in pain,
and half his strength is gone,
poor man.
He can't see.
He needs someone to guide him,
and the physical agony must be
worse than any man can bear.
You'll see yourself.
The doors are opening.
Sorrow and pity
you must feel
when you see him
with your own eyes.
His worst enemy
couldn't wish him this.
[quiet percussive music]
♪ ♪
>> Have any man's eyes ever seen
sufferings more terrible?
>> Mine have not.
>> What mania, what insanity
has turned your brain,
man of all sorrows?
>> Some demon of the night.
>> Some destructive impulse
in man,
prowling silently round you,
waiting its chance...
>> Has sprung
with inhuman strength,
howling at your throat.
>> I am fascinated
and repelled...
>> In a trance of horror
and pity.
>> I want to watch your pain...
>> And to turn from it.
>> I want to learn
from your torment...
>> But I shudder at what
the knowledge might mean.
>> Anguish...
Ay...
Agony.
Pity, someone...
I can't see where my legs
are taking me.
Is that my voice
floating like a ghost
in front of my face?
The punishment begins here.
Where will the end be?
[together] The place unspeakable
to men's ears.
Horrors too dreadful
for human eyes to see.
>> Dark now,
all dark.
This nightmarish blackness
surrounds me.
I shall never
see daylight again.
Black cloud.
A thick fog forever enfolds me
like a cloak.
The pain in my eyes, dear gods,
grinds sharper!
But the pain in my memory
cuts deeper.
[together]
This is his life now,
to suffer twice over.
The body's sharp pain
and the mind's dull ache.
>> My friends.
Are you there?
You don't desert me.
Still loyal, still kind.
You stay with me
although I am blind.
You give me your care.
I have no eyes now
to see your face,
but I know that you're here
by the sound of your voice.
[together]
Your mutilated eyes.
What darkness in your mind...
What demon could bring you
to such despair?
>> Apollo, my friends.
Apollo the god!
His power determined my agony,
but these eyes were blinded
by my own hands.
Why have eyes to see my own
degradation and misery?
[together]
This is the truth,
simple and hard.
>> Can the Earth's loveliness
or all its beauty
comfort eyes like mine?
What music could I hear
to soothe such pain?
What could I ever see
or hope to see
to bring relief or cure?
Waste no more time.
Take me from this city.
No one has ever been
more damned.
No pity for the man
all men curse
and the gods abhor.
[together]
The pain in the flesh
is doubled in the mind.
Ignorance made you happy.
The truth has made you blind.
>> Damn the man
who saw my ankles bleed
and cut me free
from those straps!
His mercy
only made things worse.
I should have died.
Did I live for this agony,
and for those that love me,
a lifetime of misery?
[together] Better a child's
grave on the mountainside.
>> Now my name
will be known forever.
My father's killer,
my mother's lover,
born to cause suffering
and to suffer.
Will there be any
horror or shame
not synonymous
with Oedipus' name
or ever a man more damned?
No, never.
[together] You bring blindness
and exile on your own head
by this action.
You would have been better dead.
>> No!
You must never say that,
never.
What has happened here
has happened for the best.
Don't dare tell me otherwise.
If I could see,
how could I look my father
in the face
when I meet him
in the underworld
or my mother?
No death
could be punishment enough
for the horror
of what I have done to her.
Or my children, whom I love,
what pleasure for me
to see their faces again,
conceived
as they were conceived?
My eyes are a father's eyes.
What would they see?
And this marvelous city
in which I was born,
the greatest among men.
If I had eyes, I could still see
its palaces and temples,
which by my own edict,
my own folly,
my own insane determination
are forbidden
the murderer of Laius,
the unclean thing that all men
turn away from
and the gods hate.
I mean myself.
With eyes in my head,
how could I look anyone
in the face,
even the Theban people
in the streets?
My hearing--
oh, these ears.
If I'd known a way
to block up these receivers
or cut them off from
every sound the world makes,
I'd have done that too
without regrets
to make a prison cell
of my own mind,
in solitary confinement
from the world.
No sight or sound
of all of these horrors
could touch me there.
That would be peace.
The wastelands of Cithaeron,
like a nurse, cradled me,
kept me alive
for this.
Trees, gullies, naked rocks,
you should have let me die.
You preserved me to parade
before the world
the well-kept secret
of who my father was
and who my mother.
And Corinth, my childhood home,
and Polybus and Merope,
whom I loved
and thought my parents,
how could you imagine
what a corrupt man
your open-faced boy would become
in his age?
If ever a rosebud was soggy
and rotten within,
if ever an apple
was filthy with maggots,
let these images describe me
in my youth.
Born damned
among the damned.
And that triple junction
under the trees,
that overgrown place
where three roads meet,
do the trees still remember
and the shaded pathways
what happened there,
whose blood was spilt?
My father's,
my own.
On the way to Thebes
I was that day,
and what acts I did when I got
there on the dead man's wife,
entering so joyfully
the same passage
that gave me exit
into the world,
sowing my seed in the warm earth
where I was germinated.
A marriage for a monster.
Father!
Brother!
Son!
Bride!
Wife!
Mother!
Children, sisters,
all confused!
Horribly mingled in a liaison
too filthy to give a name to,
too corrupt to be remembered
with anything but loathing.
No more, then.
Nothing.
What should never have been done
should never be spoken of.
Take me away,
quickly, for god's sake.
Hide me as far from the city
as a man can go.
Drown me.
Bury my body under the floor
of the ocean.
Where are you?
Is anyone there?
Or have you all gone?
For pity's sake,
someone help me.
Don't leave me alone.
Take me.
You need not draw back.
It's not infectious,
this crime of mine.
I am the one who must bear
the guilt and the punishment
and the shame,
and I must bear it alone.
>> Creon is coming.
>> It's up to him now
to deal with you.
>> He will advise us.
>> And take action
as provisional governor
in your place.
>> Creon.
Of course.
There's nothing
I can say to him,
and why should he listen
to anything I say?
I treated him unjustly.
>> I haven't come to crow,
Oedipus, now you are down,
nor to accuse you of crimes
or misjudgments
committed in the past.
But you, people,
if you have no respect
for the common decencies,
the sympathy due
to any man's suffering,
revere the sun at least,
whose warmth and brightness
sustains us.
The open street
at the end of the day
is no place
for a thing unclean, cursed,
and sentenced to be cast out.
Not even in the open air,
on the common earth,
or under the rain from heaven
will he find welcome or shelter.
Take him in.
His sufferings are no business
of the public.
It's private,
a question of family grief
and prayer,
a matter for his relations,
not the whole city.
>> This is a kindness, Creon,
more than I expected
in my degradation.
For your sake,
not mine,
let me ask one favor.
>> What favor?
You need not go on your knees.
>> Get rid of me quickly.
Deport me
to some empty wasteland
where the human voice
is never heard.
>> I could have done that
already, of course,
but it seemed safer,
as a matter of priority,
to consult the oracle.
>> But the oracle has spoken
unambiguously.
Kill the father-killer.
Drive out the unclean thing.
I am the man.
>> That's true.
That's what was said.
But in circumstances
as extraordinary as these,
it seemed safer
to consult the god again.
>> For what?
I am the cause of all this pain,
and the punishment is known.
What is there to ask?
>> Haven't you, of all men,
learned to trust the gods?
>> Yes, I've learned that.
One favor more
I must ask or beg.
The woman who lies dead
in the palace,
let her be buried decently
with whatever formalities
you think appropriate.
She's your sister,
your flesh and blood,
and you owe her that.
In my case,
Thebes is my country,
my homeland, though I never
knew it until today,
and my presence
alive within her walls
would be a curse on her.
Let me leave
and go up into my own mountains
of Cithaeron.
My mother and father left me
there to die in the wilderness,
and I shall die now
in accordance with their wishes
who wished me dead.
My death, I know,
will be mysterious.
My life was saved miraculously
and not for the common death
of old age or sickness
but for some other ending,
awe-inspiring and perhaps evil.
Let it come as it will.
And now, my children,
the boys, Creon,
Polynices and Eteocles,
they're almost men
and can look after themselves
wherever they go,
but the girls,
they're so small,
such babies yet.
They have shared
everything with me,
food and drink and company.
I doubt if they've ever so much
as eaten a meal
away from their father.
Look after them, Creon,
for my sake.
And if I could,
just once more,
touch them and share my tears
with theirs.
Just once more.
Kindness and generosity
could do no more.
Grasping their hands
and remembering,
I could imagine I had eyes
to see them once more
before I go.
Shh!
I heard something.
Are they here already?
Are they crying?
You have taken pity, Creon,
and brought them to me unasked,
the dearest of my children.
Am I right?
>> I know how much
you love them
and love them still
in spite of everything.
>> God bless you, Creon.
May you have better luck
both as a king and as a man
than I've had.
Children,
where are you?
Come here to me.
Embrace me.
Antigone, Ismene.
These hands
are your brother's hands
and your father's,
the hands that blinded me.
I was blind already,
if the truth be known.
I saw nothing as I fathered you
on my own mother--
only a wife.
Was ever a man more blind?
My eyes can't see you now,
but they can cry still.
And they do to think what hard
lives you will lead in the world
when you're grown up,
the vicious things
people will say.
Festivals and public holidays,
no fun for you they'll be,
staying at home in tears
while the others
enjoy themselves.
And then later, when you're old
enough to be married,
where is the man who will be
brave or foolhardy enough
to take you on
and that scandalous reputation
that shall stick
to all my children
and my children's children?
"Their father killed his father,
"then plowed up the same ground
where he sprouted,
"gave his own mother children.
Those girls, yes,
they're his sisters."
That's the sort of thing
people will say.
And who will marry you
in those circumstances?
Nobody will.
My poor girls.
Virginity and barrenness
is all you can look forward to.
Creon,
Menoeceus was your father,
and you must be their father now
as nearest kin.
The two of us who brought them
into the world
are both dead or dead to them.
They're quite alone
apart from you.
Don't let them wander as orphans
through the world,
homeless as well as husbandless,
and don't condemn them to share
the punishment that falls on me.
They're very young,
very poor now
and, if you don't help them,
quite without hope.
Promise me and take my hand
upon the promise.
Good brother.
Good.
If you were older,
my girls,
and could understand
such things,
I could tell you so much,
but we'll leave that now.
When you say your prayers,
ask for peace,
a place to call home,
and a better life
than your father has had.
>> That's enough.
No more tears in public.
You must go inside.
>> No.
Not yet.
Just a moment longer,
even against
your better judgment.
>> No.
Everything must be done
correctly,
the proper thing
at the proper time.
>> On one condition,
that I have your promise--
>> My promise?
>> To send me into exile.
>> That is the gods' decision,
not mine.
I shall follow
their instructions.
>> Don't force me in there
when the gods hate me.
>> If they hate you,
they will cast you out.
>> But do you agree?
Will you do what I ask?
>> No, I shall do
what I say I will do.
>> Well...
I'm in your hands.
>> Then go in.
But leave the children here.
>> The children?
Don't take them away from me.
Don't do that.
>> Don't give me orders.
Those days are over.
Your orders have brought you
to this.
Now you must learn to obey.
[desolate organ music]
♪ ♪
[together]
People of Thebes,
inheritors of the ancient city
of our ancestors.
>> You have all seen
Oedipus the king...
>> Who solved the riddle
the she-monster sang...
>> And by his genius,
saved the state...
>> And whose fame for that deed
was so great...
>> No man could but envy him...
[together] Overwhelmed
by a tidal wave of disasters
that would sweep him
to his grave.
>> Judge no man's life
until he is dead.
>> There are no winners...
>> Till the race is run.
>> Call no man fortunate...
>> Or safe from pain...
both: Till he lies in his last
everlasting bed
and the earth covers his head.
♪ ♪